.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2015 Alexey Filin
.TH "NPSYNC" 1 2015 "Storage utils" "User Commands"
.\" cp 
.SH NAME
npsync \- synchronize files and directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
\fBnpsync\fP [\fIOPTION\fP]... \fISRC\fP... \fIDST\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
Synchronize \fISRC\fP(s) and \fIDST\fP on storages with non-POSIX interfaces.
.LP
\fISRC\fP(s) and \fIDST\fP should exist (see description of storage type `npsync://' for exception).
\fIDST\fP is parent for \fISRC\fP copy.
Use option \fB-h\fP to print available storage interfaces.
.LP
Interface utilities used to access storage(s) are run with \fItimeout\fP.
SIGTERM is sent in 10 minutes, SIGKILL is sent in 15 minutes of utility execution wall-clock time.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.TP 11
\fB-a\fP
Archive mode, the same as \`-r -c -d mtime,size'.
.TP 11
\fB--aux-npsync\fP \fIFILE\fP
Use source item attributes and checksums recorded in auxiliary catalogue \fIFILE\fP instead of storage.
Storage attributes and checksums are used if absent in catalogue.
.TP 11
\fB-c\fP
The same as \`--create-dirs --create-files'.
.TP 11
\fB--copied\fP \fIFILE\fP
The same as \`--copied-dirs FILE --copied-files FILE'.
.TP 11
\fB--copied-dirs\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add to \fIFILE\fP names of source directories (to be) copied to destination.
.TP 11
\fB--copied-files\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add to \fIFILE\fP names of source files (to be) copied to destination.
.TP 11
\fB--create-dirs\fP
Create absent destination directories existing in source.
.TP 11
\fB--create-files\fP
Create absent destination files existing in source.
.TP 11
\fB-d\fP \fICRITERIA\fP
Set difference criteria for source-destination file comparison.
\fICRITERIA\fP is a comma-separated list of words (without spaces): \fImtime\fP, \fIsize\fP, \fIcks\fP.
.RS 11
.IP "  * \fImtime\fP" 11
is destination modification time older.
.IP "  * \fIsize\fP" 11
are file sizes equal. If mtime has been tested, then size is compared only if mtimes are equal.
.IP "  * \fIcks\fP" 11
are file checksums equal.
.RE
.IP "" 11
Default list is empty, so no files are compared.
.TP 11
\fB--exclude\fP \fIPATTERN\fP
Exclude source files matching extended \fIbash\fP(1) \fIPATTERN\fP.
.TP 11
\fB--exclude-file\fP \fIFILE\fP
Exclude source items read from \fIFILE\fP.
.TP 11
\fB--exclude-regex\fP \fIPATTERN\fP
Exclude source files matching \fIregex\fP(3) \fIPATTERN\fP.
.TP 11
\fB-f\fP
Force execution, ignore errors.
.TP 11
\fB--failed\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add to FILE formatted records for files and directories failed to be synced.
.TP 11
\fB-i\fP
Prompt before every modification.
.TP 11
\fB-h\fP
Print help and exit.
.TP 11
\fB--include\fP \fIPATTERN\fP
Include source files matching extended \fIbash\fP(1) \fIPATTERN\fP.
.TP 11
\fB--include-file\fP \fIFILE\fP
Include source items read from \fIFILE\fP.
.TP 11
\fB--include-regex\fP \fIPATTERN\fP
Include source files matching \fIregex\fP(3) \fIPATTERN\fP.
.TP 11
\fB-l\fP \fILEVEL\fP
Copy nested directories with \fILEVEL\fP as the maximum level of nesting
(by default the number is zero i.e. unlimited).
.TP 11
\fB--npsync-interface\fP \fIFILE\fP
Load npsync storage interface from \fIFILE\fP.
.TP 11
\fB--omit-copy-cks-check\fP
Omit check of copied file checksums.
.TP 11
\fB-p\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add source file and directory attributes to \fIFILE\fP.
The \fIFILE\fP can be used later with prefix `npsync://' as source or destination.
.IP "" 13
NB: The option turns on checksum calculation for all source files.
.IP "" 13
NB2: The option can't be used simultaneously with \`-t'.
.TP 11
\fB-r\fP
Synchronize and/or copy nested directories recursively.
.TP 11
\fB--real-data-cks\fP
Calculate checksum of real data when possible instead of getting stored value
.TP 11
\fB-s\fP \fIATTRS\fP
The same as
.br
`--sync-dir-attrs \fIATTRS\fP --sync-file-attrs \fIATTRS\fP'.
.TP 11
\fB--sync-dir-attrs\fP \fIATTRS\fP
Synchronize directory attributes in destination with source.
\fIATTRS\fP is a comma-separated list of words (without spaces): \fImode\fP, \fImtime\fP, \fIowner\fP.
.RS 11
.IP "  * \fImode\fP" 11
file mode bits.
.IP "  * \fImtime\fP" 11
modification time.
.IP "  * \fIowner\fP" 11
uid and gid.
.RE
.TP 11
\fB--sync-file-attrs\fP \fIATTRS\fP
Synchronize file attributes in destination with source.
\fIATTRS\fP is a comma-separated list of words (without spaces): \fImode\fP, \fImtime\fP, \fIowner\fP.
.RS 11
.IP "  * \fImode\fP" 11
file mode bits.
.IP "  * \fImtime\fP" 11
modification time.
.IP "  * \fIowner\fP" 11
uid and gid.
.RE
.TP 11
\fB--synced\fP \fIFILE\fP
The same as \`--synced-dirs FILE --synced-files FILE'
.TP 11
\fB--synced-dirs\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add to \fIFILE\fP names of source directories with attributes (to be)
synchronized in destination. List generated in test mode (dirs with attrs
to be synced) may differ since:
.RS 11
.IP "  *" 4
Directories absent in destination can't be checked (when option \`-c' is given).
.IP "  *" 4
File copying changes mtime of parent dir.
.RE
.TP 11
\fB--synced-files\fP \fIFILE\fP
Add to \fIFILE\fP names of source files with attributes (to be)
synchronized in destination. List generated in test mode (files with attrs
to be synced) may differ since:
.RS 11
.IP "  *" 4
Files absent in destination can't be checked (when option \`-c' is given).
.IP "  *" 4
File copying changes mtime of parent dir.
.RE
.TP 11
\fB-t\fP
Test mode, don't perform real synchronization and/or copying, simply
report potential problems and discover what is to be synchronized and/or copied.
.IP "" 13
NB: The option can't be used simultaneously with \`-p'.
.TP 11
\fB-v\fP
Verbose output. Multiple -v options increase the verbosity.
Default level is equal zero. The maximum is equal 3.
.TP 11
\fB--version\fP
Print version and exit.
.SH "INCLUDE/EXCLUDE PATTERNS AND FILES"
Paths used in pattern matching are source paths.
Files exclude-file and include-file if pointed are to contain paths separated by newline character.
Each pattern option can be assigned only once.
Exclude-file and include-file can be assigned some times, contents of the files are added.
.LP
There are three policies to match file paths:
.IP "  1." 5
Neither patterns nor exclude-file nor include-file are assigned.
Include all files by default. 
.IP "  2." 5
An exclude pattern or file assigned first in command line. Matching algo:
.RS 2
.IP "  2.1" 6
Include all files by default.
.IP "  2.2" 6
If path to file matches an exclude pattern (bash or regex) or is read from exclude-file exclude it then check if file matches an include pattern (bash or regex) or is read from include-file include it.
.RE
.IP "  3." 5
An include pattern or file assigned first in command line. Matching algo:
.RS 4
.IP "  3.1" 6
Exclude all files by default.
.IP "  3.2" 6
If path to file matches an include pattern (bash or regex) or is read from include-file include it then check if file matches an exclude pattern (bash or regex) or is read from exclude-file exclude it.
.RE
.LP
Filtering of directory paths works the same way with exclude-file and include-file only.
Pattern matching for directory paths is not performed.
.SH "ASYNCHRONOUS EVENTS"
.LP
Default.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.LP
.IP "124" 5
Utility terminated
.IP "137" 5
Utility killed
.IP "70" 5
Failed to execute a command
.IP "71" 5
Option is wrong
.IP "72" 5
Nested dir
.IP "73" 5
Too deep level of nested dirs
.IP "74" 5
Is not a regular file
.IP "75" 5
Is not a directory
.IP "76" 5
Checksum type mismatch for source and destination
.IP "77" 5
Checksum mismatch for source and created copy
.IP "78" 5
Checksum type not supported
.IP "79" 5
Corrupted line in npsync-file
.IP "80" 5
Destination file/dir does not exist
.IP "81" 5
Unacceptable name of storage item
.IP "82" 5
Files can't be copied from catalogue
.IP "83" 5
Wrong destination mtime format
.IP "84" 5
Wrong source mtime format
.LP
See also exit status of used utilities.
.SH "CONSEQUENCES OF ERRORS"
.LP
If \fInpsync\fP is prematurely terminated by a signal or error, files
or file hierarchies may be only partially copied and/or files
and directories may have incorrect permissions, modification time, owner.
.SH "APPLICATION USAGE"
.LP
\fBNpsync\fP implements a small subset of rsync features, so if \fISRC\fP and
\fIDST\fP are placed on storages with POSIX interfaces then use of rsync can be smarter.
Data copying is verified always with checksum matching like rsync does.
The utility was designed to operate with multi-terabyte nested directories
placed on storages of different types so only regular files and directories
are supported.
No extended attributes are synchronized.
Use an archiver to keep not regular files and extended attributes or small files
efficiently.
.LP
Destination file or directory is ignored if it is absent in source.
An error happens in inverse case.
If \fISRC\fP is alone swap it with \fIDST\fP in argument list and run \fBnpsync\fP in test mode to discover destination files or directories absent in source, e.g.:
.IP "" 4
npsync -a -t -f a/b/name c/d
.IP "" 4
npsync -a -t -f c/d/name a/b
.LP
Be careful, attribute synchronization can change destination directory mtime so a destination file absent in source can become newer than its parent directory.
.LP
Catalogue can be used as \fISRC\fP or \fIDST\fP.
The only difference is file copying, catalogue doesn't keep files, so can't be used as a source for file copying.
Directory creation is provided by catalogue as a source with options \`-r --create-dirs -f', but mtime may differ from original because attributes of parent directories can be synchronized before child creation.
So mtime is to be synced after directory creation with options \`-r -s mtime -f'.
.LP
Some storages provide checksum as a file attribute (e.g. CASTOR HSM).
If the checksum is provided then it is used by default.
To force checksum calculation for real data option \`--real-data-cks' is to be used (e.g. to check real data integrity on storage medium).
Use the option not frequently to prolong storage durability.
.LP
The version supports checksum type \fIadler32\fP only.
.LP
HSM system can provide a utility to pre-stage files to disk from tape, to reorder tape operations in an optimal way.
CASTOR HSM provides utility \`stager_get' to reduce overall file access time for files migrated to tapes.
At first list of accessed files is to be created with option \`--copied-files'.
SRC is an absolute CASTOR path in the example below:
.IP "" 4
npsync -a -t --copied-files FILELIST SRC DST
.LP
Accessed files are to be pre-staged:
.IP "" 4
stager_get -f FILELIST -U mytag
.LP
Pre-staging is performed asynchronously.
Utility \`stager_qry' is to be used to query status of pre-staged files:
.IP "" 4
stager_qry -U mytag
.LP
At last pre-staged files are accessed:
.IP "" 4
npsync -a SRC DST
.LP
Option \`--aux-npsync' can be used for synchronization to get source item attributes and checksums from catalogue instead of storage.
Number of IO operations is reduced significantly in the case.
.LP
Option \`--omit-copy-cks-check' is meant for advanced optimizations.
It turns off source checksum calculation and copy checksum comparison and should not be used in common case.
Correct optimization is to compare checksums for an extra stage after data transfer with catalogue on destination side locally or with value provided by destination storage.
It may help to reduce load on transfer channel between source and destination twice and more.
.LP
Option \`--failed' is to be used to automatize error handling.
Generated file contains records of the format:
.IP "" 4
<error num> <utility> <source item> <destination item>
.LP
Field <error num> is the number of error.
Field <utility> is either path to failed utility or '-'.
Fields <source item> and <destination item> are formatted paths to source and destination items.
In two cases the paths are confusing:
.IP "  *" 4
Field <destination item> can be empty if error happened with source item,
.IP "  *" 4
Field <source item> can point a directory containing child with wrong name.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP " 1." 4
Attribute comparison.
Destination attributes are compared with source.
Case to discover what destination attributes are to be synchronized:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -r -t -f -s mode,mtime,owner SRC DST
.EE
.RE
.IP " 2." 4
Common comparison.
Report potential problems and discover what source
files and directories are to be copied.
Case before mirroring to test enviromnent and access to source(s).
Case to discover what files and directories were
added or updated in source and absent or outdated in destination:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -a -t -f SRC DST
.EE
.RE
.IP " 3." 4
Full comparison.
Checksums of each pair source -- destination are calculated and compared.
Case to discover silent data corruptions:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -r -t -f -d mtime,size,cks SRC DST
.EE
.RE
.IP " 4." 4
Attribute synchronization. Destination attributes are synchronized with source.
Case to restore destination attributes if they were lost (e.g. CASTOR
doesn't keep seconds in mtime so seconds can be restored after copying
from CASTOR):
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -r -s mode,mtime,owner -v SRC DST &> DST.out
.EE
.TP 4
NB:
Be careful, outdated destination after attribute synchronization
can't be updated with common mirroring.
Only full mirroring or comparison can discover mismatched files.
.RE
.IP " 5." 4
Common mirroring. Case of outdated destination:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -a -v -v SRC DST &> DST.out
.EE
.TP 4
NB:
Catalogue as a source provides comparison with destination attributes only.
No destination files can be replaced.
.RE
.IP " 6." 4
Full mirroring.
Checksums of each pair source -- destination are calculated and compared.
Destination file is replaced with source if checksums differ.
No files and directories absent in destination are copied from source(s), only error messages about the items are printed.
Case to restore from source(s) (e.g. from back-up) after storage errors (e.g. silent data corruptions) in destination:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -r -c -d mtime,size,cks -v -v SRC DST &> DST.out
.EE
.TP 4
NB:
Catalogue as a source provides comparison with destination attributes only.
No destination files can be replaced
.RE
.IP " 7." 4
Interactive selection of mirrored files and directories.
Case to speed up interactive selection with two stage execution.
First stage is to create interactively list of mirrored files and directories:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -a -t -i --copied FILE SRC DST
.EE
.RE
.IP "" 4
Second one is to mirror with the list:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -a --include-file FILE SRC DST
.EE
.RE
.IP " 8." 4
Catalogue creation.
Catalogue can be used as a source or destination.
The only difference is file copying, catalogue doesn't keep files, so can't be used as a source for file copying.
Case to create catalogue:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -a SRC npsync://SRC.npsync
.EE
.RE
.IP " 9." 4
Catalogue clearing.
File used with -p option is not recreated so can contain multiple outdated
records for the same file or directory being used some times with modified
source. If file and directory modification history doesn't matter the
records can be removed.
Case to create copy of catalogue without outdated records:
.RS 4
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync npsync://orig.npsync npsync://copy.npsync
.EE
.TP 4
NB:
Order of records in catalogue can change after its modification.
.RE
.IP " 10." 5
Full offline comparison.
Catalogue can be used for comparison like file storage as a source and destination without limitations.
Moreover comparison in the case is performed much faster.
It is not required a lot of I/O operations to get attributes and checksums from catalogue.
Case to perform full comparison by catalogues only:
.RS 5
.IP "" 4
.EX
npsync -d mtime,size,cks -s mode,mtime,owner -t npsync://first.npsync npsync://second.npsync
.EE
.TP 4
NB:
Equivalence can be tested yet faster with catalogue checksum comparison.
Old records in the case are to be removed from catalogues as described above and checksums are to be calculated and compared for sorted catalogues:
.IP "" 8
.EX
sort -n catalogue|md5sum
.EE
.RE
.SH BUGS
\fBNpsync\fP doesn't accept names with newline char '\\n'. The char is used by design as Internal Field Separator (IFS) for directory listing.
.SH "FUTURE DIRECTIONS"
List of storage interfaces implemented currently includes FS with POSIX interface, CASTOR HSM system, NPSYNC catalogue.
The interfaces are implemented with virtual functions to storage utilities, so \fBnpsync\fP was designed to extend the list easily for any type of storage with tree-like representation of contents by interface utilities.
A list of possible cases includes:
.IP "  *" 4
Storage without POSIX interface with interface utilities (e.g. a remote, cloud storage).
.IP "  *" 4
FS with unusable or absent kernel driver.
Interface utilities could provide access to storage without the driver.
.IP "  *" 4
FS implemented with Linux FUSE.
Interface utilities could bypass FUSE to accelerate access to the FS.
.IP "  *" 4
File and directory names can be converted somehow for syncing with storage function _item_path.
So a storage interface can provide specific path composition or translate names from one language to another.
.IP "  *" 4
The utility was written in bash, so can be easily adapted by user e.g. to perform additional actions for synchronization or comparison.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IP "POSIX FS: " 10
\fIcp\fP, \fIls\fP, \fImkdir\fP, \fItouch\fP, \fIchmod\fP, \fIchown\fP, \fIstat\fP, \fIrm\fP
.IP "CASTOR: " 10
\fIrfcp\fP, \fIrfcat\fP, \fInsls\fP, \fInsmkdir\fP, \fInstouch\fP, \fInssetchecksum\fP, \fInschmod\fP, \fInschown\fP, \fIrfstat\fP, \fInsrm\fP
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \(co 2013-2015 Alexey Filin.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
